# Let's Connect

=> / Home

> I think socializing on the Internet is to socializing what reality TV is to reality. - Aaron Sorkin

I am glad that you want to connect with me. The easiest way to contact me is via email at rohit@rohitfarmer.com or Mastodon (see below). I love to chat and am happy to jump to an instant messenger or IRC channel, but I prefer to be contacted by email or Mastodon first.


## Social media in active use

=> https://fosstodon.org/@swatantra Mastodon
=> https://bsky.app/profile/rohitfarmer.com Bluesky
=> https://pixelfed.social/@swatantra PixelFed
=> https://ramblingreaders.org/user/swatantra BookWyrm

## My preferred instant messaging or chat platforms

Note: please email to ask for instant messaging handles.

* XMPP/Jabber
* IRC
* Signal
* Telegram
* Jitsi


## Technical
=> https://github.com/rohitfarmer GitHub 
=> https://www.linkedin.com/in/rohitfarmer LinkedIn
=> https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCr_PZHmp5gMCukRqKhdGIrQ YouTube
=> https://www.slideshare.net/rohitfarmer Slide Share

## Archived / rarely updated / forgotten

Note: these are the accounts that I still maintain for historical reasons, but they are not in active use. If you connect with me through one of these, I may get an email notification.

=> https://twitter.com/rohitfarmer Twitter
=> https://dev.to/rohitfarmer Dev.to 
=> https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Rohit-Farmer Research Gate
=> https://unsplash.com/@rohitfarmer Unsplash for my freely distributed photos.
=> https://www.instagram.com/rohit.farmer.photography/ Instagram account for my amateur photography work.
=> https://www.facebook.com/rohitfarmerphotography Facebook page for my amateur photography work.
=> https://rohitfarmer.medium.com/ Medium for non-technical writings.
=> https://www.goodreads.com/user/show/82085648-rohit-farmer Good Reads
=> https://www.libib.com/u/rohitfarmer Libib for my physical books home library.
=> https://www.discogs.com/user/rohitfarmer Discogs for my physical medium music library.
