# Rohit's Tinylog

=> / Home

author: @rohit@rohitfarmer.com
avatar: :)
license: © 2018 - present Rohit Farmer

## 2025-04-03 14:26:28 UTC
After a long hiatus, I have resumed listening to audiobooks in my car since I started commuting to work daily. The best part is that I borrow audiobooks from my local Montgomery County, Maryland library. In the past three weeks, I finished listening to Analog Church/Christian by Jay Y. Kim and am now listening to The Revenge of Analog by David Sax. Public libraries in the USA are a blessing and a massive resource that few people tap into. 

## 2024-12-10 20:45:08 UTC
Yesterday, I wrote a blog post on the use of Generative AI in writing and how it alleviates the pressure on me to write about trivial things and start sharing my personal views and experiences. I posted the link to the post on the social media including LinkedIn thinking that I will receive some response from the cummunity, but I didn't. So, it was a bit disappointing. 

## 2024-12-09 15:26:47 UTC
Today, I read this beautifully written article, "Planning for an Uncertain Future" (link below), by Nicholas Johnson, on his Gemini website. I may not agree with all the details that he mentioned, which sounded very confident and methodological, but I do agree with the overall message that too much future planning at the expense of current joy and life fulfillment is futile. So, do today what you can do today to live a better life than worrying or overplanning for your future.

=>gemini://nicholasjohnson.ch/2024/12/09/planning-for-an-uncertain-future/ Planning for an Uncertain Future

## 2024-12-05 19:58:15 UTC
I am working with a data frame with 53 million rows and 28 columns, which I stored as a .feather binary file. On the disk, it's around 5 GB. Fortunately, I am working on an HPC and have ample RAM to load the entire data frame on the memory. However, working with such a huge file is slow and cumbersome.     

## 2024-12-03 01:04:20 UTC
Today, I updated my HTTP website: refined the navigation bar, updated the look of my "Now" page, redesigned the blog post comments section, and added icons for various websites using Font Awesome.

## 2024-12-01 22:07:30 UTC
Thanksgiving holidays spent well. Had a great time with friends and family over dinners. Caught up on much-needed sleep. And got some spare time to work on my passion projects that needed attention for quite some time. I did not do any black Friday shopping this year, though.

## 2024-11-29 02:48:19 UTC
Happy Thanksgiving, USA, and every other country that celebrates it. We had an Indian-American mixed family lunch today, and we enjoyed the variety of food and spending time with the family after a long time. One of my colleagues coined a new term for our kind of lunch today: "Curkey." That's a mix of curry and turkey. We all loved it.

## 2024-11-27 20:38:44 UTC
After a long day today, I wrote a blog post for my primary website, https://rohitfarmer.com, and cross-posted the same article here on my Gemlog. The post is a tutorial explaining how to set up a Gemini capsule/website on a Google Cloud compute instance. I re-submitted the Gemlog URL to Antenna, and it fetched and listed the title of the latest post. Related to Gemini, everything is in order. 

## 2024-11-25 21:53:07 UTC
I moved my Gemini capsule from gemini://rohit.pollux.casa to my domain gemini://rohitfarmer.com. However, the previous website is still running. I will ask Adele to delete it once I know my self-hosted setup works correctly. Like my HTTP website, this capsule runs on the same Google Cloud micro instance (free tier) via the Agate server. I am building this website using Visual Studio Code with a GemText syntax highlighter plugin. The website code/content gets uploaded to a private repository on Codeberg.


