=> / Home
=> /gemlog Gemlog

# Why I’m Saying No to Smartwatches

(A reflection on how smartwatches breed distraction, invade privacy, and forsake the timeless elegance of a simple, traditional watch)

In a world that craves real-time updates, it’s no surprise that the smartphone on your desk and the laptop in your bag now have company: the smartwatch on your wrist. The pitch is always the same—unmatched convenience, integrated health tracking, seamless connectivity. Yet, as sleek as these devices might appear, I can’t shake the feeling that we’re trading more than we’re gaining. Here’s why I’m giving smartwatches a hard pass.

## 1. Distraction Masquerading as Convenience

Proponents of smartwatches love to highlight how you can read texts, respond to calls, and glance at vital stats without ever fishing out your phone. But think about it: if you’re checking your wrist every few minutes, are you really saving time—or simply shifting the same digital compulsion from your pocket to your arm?

- **A New Habit Loop:** Instead of occasionally checking the time, smartwatch wearers now have a constant stream of notifications. A subtle vibration or chime at your wrist keeps you in a perpetual state of alertness. This hyper-connected habit can undermine moments of peace and reflection.
- **Fragmented Attention:** Where a traditional watch is a simple glance, a smartwatch invites you into a mini digital ecosystem. One notification can easily lead to swiping through widgets, checking weather updates, or responding to emails—often without conscious thought.

It’s hard to call it “convenient” when it fosters an even deeper reliance on instant digital feedback.

## 2. An Intimate Device with Privacy Red Flags

Most of us are aware by now that smartphones harvest vast amounts of data—our location, browsing habits, and more. Yet smartwatches take this a step further, monitoring metrics like heart rate, sleep patterns, and physical activity.

- **All-Seeing, All-Collecting:** These devices know how you’re sleeping, when you’re stressed, where you go, and how frequently you move. It’s not a paranoid fantasy to worry about the misuse of such personal insights.
- **Opaque Data Practices:** Even when companies promise robust security, data leaks and breaches happen. A single vulnerability could expose deeply personal information—do you really want your stress levels or daily routine in the wrong hands?

Rather than adding yet another data-hungry device to the daily mix, we could strive to retain a bit more of our privacy.

## 3. Addressing a Problem We Created

A century ago, a watch’s primary function was clear: tell the time. Now, tech giants have transformed the wristwatch into a mini-computer, solving a modern “problem” of constant digital access—one largely fueled by their own innovations.

- **Expanding Screen Count:** Our lives are saturated with screens. By adding yet another one, we’re fulfilling a demand that might not exist if we’d been more deliberate about our digital boundaries in the first place.
- **Minimalism vs. Maximization:** Tech culture often conflates “can do” with “should do.” Just because we can cram fitness tracking, email alerts, and dozens of apps into a watch doesn’t mean it’s necessary. Sometimes, simplicity has its own profound value.

## 4. The Daily Charging Dance

A classic watch might run on a single battery for years—or, in the case of mechanical pieces, forever with regular winding. Smartwatches, by contrast, often require charging every single day.

- **Dependence on Power:** Missing a night of charging renders a smartwatch useless. Whether you’re traveling, camping, or simply having a busy day, the constant tether to a power source is an added chore.
- **Environmental Costs:** Continual charging uses more electricity over time, and upgrading when batteries degrade or software becomes obsolete contributes to e-waste. In a world increasingly aware of sustainability, a gadget requiring constant power feels like a step backward.

## 5. Style, Substance, and Longevity

Mechanical and traditional quartz watches are admired as timeless pieces of craftsmanship. Smartwatches, on the other hand, tend to look and feel outdated once a newer model is released—often in just a year or two.

- **Disposable Technology:** Software updates eventually stop, batteries wear out, and designs swiftly become antiquated. Contrast this with a mechanical watch that can be handed down through generations, retaining both function and aesthetic appeal.
- **A Personal Accessory:** Watches are more than just timekeepers—they’re fashion statements, heirlooms, or sentimental items. The design and heritage of a classic watch carry a weight of tradition and personal meaning that’s hard to replicate with a rapidly outdated device.

## 6. When Health Tracking Becomes Overbearing

Smartwatches heavily market their fitness and wellness features, offering data on everything from your heart rate variability to your sleep quality. But more data isn’t always better.

- **The Stress of Constant Monitoring:** Having every heartbeat, step, and sleep cycle scrutinized can create unnecessary anxiety. People can become obsessed with hitting arbitrary numbers, losing sight of how they actually feel.
- **Ignoring Intuition:** Our bodies are remarkably adept at signaling when we’re fatigued or stressed. Over-reliance on digital metrics can diminish our innate ability to self-regulate and pay attention to real-world cues like energy levels, mood, and hunger.

In the quest to be healthier, we risk letting technology overshadow our natural sense of balance.

## The Bottom Line

Smartwatches aren’t inherently evil—they have their niche. Athletes can benefit from on-the-go metrics, and certain medical conditions might be easier to manage with real-time data. But for the average person, a smartwatch can be yet another distraction, a data-collecting device that siphons away presence and peace of mind.

Sometimes, we need fewer screens in our lives, not more. Sometimes, it’s nice to trust our intuition about our health instead of deferring to digital stats. And sometimes, a simple watch that does one thing—telling time—feels refreshingly profound in a world fixated on doing everything. 

So I’m saying no. No to another charger on my nightstand, no to another source of buzzing notifications on my arm, and no to the ever-expanding digital tether. It’s a small stance, perhaps, but it’s my way of reclaiming a bit of calm in a constantly connected world.

### Have thoughts, feedback, or questions? Feel free to write to me at:

=> mailto:rohit@rohitfarmer.com rohit@rohitfarmer.com

### Interact
Comment and join the discussion on the following platform(s):

=> https://fosstodon.org/@swatantra/114281545122014449 Mastodon
=>https://bsky.app/profile/rohitfarmer.com/post/3llzalquyys2r Bluesky

### Crosspost
This post is also available at:

=> https://rohitfarmer.com/posts/2025/saying-no-to-smartwatches/
