=> / Home
=> /gemlog Gemlog

# Writing My Story with Inspiration from Notable Lives

(Inspired by the lives of great thinkers, I’ve begun writing my own story to preserve my family’s legacy.)

Lately, I’ve been thinking about starting to write my autobiography—a living document that will evolve over time and serve as a memoir for future generations. Sadly, none of my ancestors took the time to record our family history, and everything I know about my lineage comes from stories passed down by relatives. Like most children, I only paid attention to the stories that captured my interest and never thought to dig deeper or ask about what might have been left unsaid. By the time I became old enough to reflect seriously on where we come from, all of my grandparents had passed away.

That’s part of why I want to write down what I do know—at least about the Farmer family in India: my parents, siblings, cousins, and children. I’ve never written a book before, let alone a biography, so I decided to draw inspiration by reading autobiographies of notable individuals.

I recently borrowed the audiobook of The Autobiography of Benjamin Franklin from my local library. It’s a six-hour narration, which I listened to passively during my daily commute over a couple of weeks. Even with that passive listening, it offered valuable insight into how one might structure a life story. I’m currently listening to Nikola Tesla’s autobiography and plan to explore one or two more before I begin writing my own.

Apart from the motivation it gave me, Franklin’s autobiography left a strong impression on me—both in terms of his life and the lessons it offers.

The Autobiography of Benjamin Franklin is much more than a personal account; it’s a lens into the Enlightenment ideals that helped shape the early American republic. Written in four parts over several decades, it traces Franklin’s life from his modest beginnings in Boston, through his early struggles and successes in Philadelphia, to his accomplishments as a printer, inventor, diplomat, and statesman. It’s truly remarkable how much one person can achieve in a lifetime by resisting distractions and committing to purposeful living—for both personal growth and the benefit of society.

Franklin’s tone is modest yet assured, blending dry humor with earnest advice. One of the most memorable sections of the book is his methodical approach to self-improvement, encapsulated in his list of [13 virtues](#list-of-13-virtues)—a personal code he tracked daily. This part reads like an 18th-century precursor to modern productivity literature and remains strikingly relevant.

One particularly moving moment is Franklin’s heartfelt expression of regret over the death of his young son, Francis, from smallpox. He admits that he chose not to inoculate the boy—then a controversial decision—and was haunted by it for the rest of his life. He shares this deeply personal loss not only as a sorrowful memory but as a cautionary tale. Had he followed the advice of inoculation advocates, his son might have been saved. This admission adds profound emotional depth to the narrative and highlights Franklin’s capacity for reflection and moral honesty.

> “In 1736, I lost one of my sons, a fine boy of four years old, by the small-pox, taken in the common way. I long regretted bitterly, and still regret that I had not given it to him by inoculation. This I mention for the sake of parents who omit that operation, on the supposition that they should never forgive themselves if the child died under it: my example showing that the regret may be the same either way, and that, therefore, the safer should be chosen.”

The book also sheds light on colonial America’s social, political, and economic life. Franklin’s efforts to establish institutions like the first public library, the University of Pennsylvania, and the American Philosophical Society underscore his enduring commitment to civic duty and community progress.

Though the autobiography ends before the American Revolution and remains unfinished, it offers a compelling portrait of personal development and public service. Franklin’s industriousness, curiosity, and pragmatism shine throughout.

In essence, The Autobiography of Benjamin Franklin is a timeless read for anyone interested in history, self-betterment, or the transformative power of intellect and ambition guided by principle. It’s more than just the story of one man’s rise—it’s a testament to how integrity, curiosity, and community-mindedness can shape both individual lives and the world at large.


## List of 13 Virtues

1. TEMPERANCE: Eat not to dullness; drink not to elevation.
2. SILENCE: Speak not but what may benefit others or yourself; avoid trifling conversation.
3. ORDER: Let all your things have their places; let each part of your business have its time.
4. RESOLUTION: Resolve to perform what you ought; perform without fail what you resolve.
5. FRUGALITY: Make no expense but to do good to others or yourself; i.e., waste nothing.
6. INDUSTRY: Lose no time; be always employ’d in something useful; cut off all unnecessary actions.
7. SINCERITY: Use no hurtful deceit; think innocently and justly, and, if you speak, speak accordingly.
8. JUSTICE: Wrong none by doing injuries or omitting the benefits that are your duty.
9. MODERATION: Avoid extremes; forbear resenting injuries so much as you think they deserve.
10. CLEANLINESS: Tolerate no uncleanliness in body, cloaths, or habitation.
11. TRANQUILLITY: Be not disturbed at trifles, or at accidents common or unavoidable.
12. CHASTITY: Rarely use venery but for health or offspring, never to dulness, weakness, or the injury of your own or another’s peace or reputation.
13. HUMILITY: Imitate Jesus and Socrates.

Disclaimer: This blog post has been edited with the help of ChatGPT to enhance grammar, clarity, and overall flow, while retaining the original ideas and perspectives.


### Have thoughts, feedback, or questions? Feel free to write to me at:

=> mailto:rohit@rohitfarmer.com rohit@rohitfarmer.com

### Interact
Comment and join the discussion on the following platform(s):

=> https://fosstodon.org/@swatantra/114501909307841107 Mastodon

### Crosspost
This post is also available at:

=> https://rohitfarmer.com/posts/2025/writing-my-story/


